# Networking: Application-to-application communication; Sockets
_COSC 208, Introduction to Computer Systems, 2021-11-29_

## Announcements
* Project 3 ?
* Attend faculty candidate research talks
    * 11:20am Tues, Nov 30; Thurs, Dec 2; Tues, Dec 7; Wed, Dec 15
    * BeyondCS replacement 

## Outline
* Warm-up
* Application-to-application communication
* HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
* Sockets
* Client application

## Warm-up
Q1: _List at least five types of applications that communicate over a network_
* Web browser
* Video conferencing  (e.g., Zoom)
* Games
* Video streaming (e.g., Netflix)
* Audio streaming (e.g., Spotify)
* Smart assistant (e.g., Siri, Alexa, Cortana, Google Assistant)
* Cloud storage (e.g., Dropbox, iCloud)
* Email
* Maps

## Trajectory
* Individual applications — C, assembly language, program optimization
* Running multiple applications concurrently on the same hardware — enabled by operating systems, especially the process abstraction
* Running multiple applications concurrently on different machines — enabled by networking

## Application-to-application communication
* _Assume you are running such applications on your device. Who/what are the applications communicating with?_
    * Servers — web server, video/audio streaming servers, email server, etc.
    * Other users’ devices — possibly in the case of gaming or video conferencing
* Models
    * Client/server
        * Client: Application that initiates communication; typically sends "requests"; e.g., web browser asks for web page
        * Server: Application that waits for communication; typically sends "replies"; e.g., web server provides web page
    * Peer-to-peer
        * Peer: Application that both initiates and waits for communication; e.g., gaming application sends updates to peers and receives updates from peers
* Client/server communication with humans
    * _I’m going to say something and you should respond with whatever seems natural. I’m also going to display what I expected you would say; we’ll see how close my prediction was._
    * Greeting
        * Hi, I’m Aaron.
        * Hi, I’m NAME.
        * Where are you from?
        * I’m from LOCATION.
        * Were you born there?
        * Yes. ~OR~ No, I was born in LOCATION.
    * Joke
        * Knock knock.
        * Who’s there?
        * Spell.
        * Spell who?
        * Okay, fine. W-H-O.
        * [Laughs or Groans]
    * Greeting 2
        * Hi, I’m Aaron.
        * Hi, I’m NAME.
        * Are you taking a computer science course next semester?
        * Yes. ~OR~ No.
        * Which course?
        * COURSE NAME ~OR~ COURSE NUMBER ~OR~ ???
    * Strange greeting
        * Goodbye, I’m Aaron.
        * ???
    * _What did you observe?_
        * Predictions were mostly correct
        * Not sure how to respond to unexpected message
    * _How does this relate to applications?_ — applications need to agree on how they are going to communicate
* Protocol: a set of rules that govern how applications communicate
    * Client and server must follow the same protocol
    * Widely used protocols are standardized — RFCs (Requests for Comment) published by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
        * HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
        * Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
        * Secure SHell (SSH)
* Aside: networking is acronym soup!

## HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
* Widely used application protocol — why?
    * Simple — only a few pieces of information must be included in requests/responses
    * Flexible — any type of data can be put in a response (e.g., HyperText Markup Language (HTML), image, video, Portable Document Format (PDF), etc.)
    * Plain-text protocol — contains "human-readable" words instead of numeric codes
* [RFC 2616](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2616)
* HTTP request
    ```
    GET / HTTP/1.1\r\n
    Host: www.example.com\r\n
    \r\n
    ```
    * First line
        * Method — `GET`, `POST`, etc.
        * Uniform resource locator (URL), excluding domain name
        * Version — `HTTP/1.1`
    * Metdata
        * Host — domain name portion of url
        * User-Agent — web browser (or client application) name/version
        * Cookie — information used to identify a specific user
        * ...
    * Blank line
* HTTP reply
    ```
    HTTP/1.1 200 OK\r\n
    Content-Type: text/html\r\n
    \r\n
    <html>
    ...
    </html>
    ```
    * First line
        * Version — `HTTP/1.1`
        * Status — `200 OK`, `403 Forbidden`, `404 Not found`, `301 Moved permanently`, `418 I'm a teapot`, etc.
    * Metdata
        * Content-Type — type of data
        * Content-Length — size of data
        * ...
    * Blank line
    * Data

## Sockets
* Application programming interface (API) exposed by the operating system
* Similar to file API
    * `open` ~ `socket` && (`listen` || `connect`)
    * `read` ~ `recv`
    * `write` ~ `send`
    * `close` ~ `close`
* Abstraction — low-level details are hidden from the application
    * Some is handled by the operating system — network stack
    * Some is handled by the network interface card (NIC) — hardware
    * Some is handled by wireless access points and routers
* Makes it easier to write an application — application developer only needs to know how the API works (to interact with the operating system) 

## Client application (live coding)
1. Create a socket
    ```C
				                                     ↱ 0
    int sock = socket(int domain, int type, int protocol);
                    AF_INET ↲           ↳ SOCK_STREAM
    ```
    * Check for return values that indicate an error has occurred — usually `-1`
        * See the `RETURN VALUES` section of the man page
        * Use `perror` to print the error — e.g., `perror("socket failed");`
2. Establish a communication channel (i.e., connect) to the server
    ```C
    int connect(int socket, struct sockaddr *address, int addr_len);
                  sock ↲           &server_addr ↲             ↳ sizeof(serveraddr)
    ```
    * Address has two parts
        * Internet Protocol (IP) address ~ street address
            * IPv4 addresses consist of four decimal numbers, each in the range 0 to 255, separated by periods
            * E.g., `75.101.200.152` is `cosc208.cs.colgate.edu`'s IP address
            * `127.0.0.1` is a special address a machine uses to refer to itself
        * Port number ~ apartment number
            * Range 1 to 65536 — 16-bits, short
            * E.g., `80` is HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
    * Address encoded in a `struct sockaddr_in`
        ```C
        struct sockaddr_in server_addr;
        server_addr.sin_family = AF_INET:
                                   ↳ meaning: Internet Protocol (IP) version 4 
        server_addr.sin_port = htons(80);
                                      ↳ meaning: HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
        server_addr.sin_addr.s_addr = htonl(0x7F000001);
                                                ↳ meaning: 127.0.0.1 (localhost)
        ```
        * Numbers must be expressed in network byte order (i.e., big endian)
            * Convert from host (little endian for ARM) to network byte order using `htons` for `short` and `htonl` for `int` or `long`
            * Convert from network to host byte order using `ntohs` for `short` and `ntohl` for `int` or `long`
3. Send/receive messages
    ```C
    int send(int socket, void *buffer, int buf_len, int flags);
    int recv(int socket, void *buffer, int buf_len, int flags);
              sock ↲                                       ↳ 0 
    ``` 
4. Close communication channel
    ```C
    int close(int socket);
               sock ↲ 
    ```

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>


Full program
```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/socket.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <arpa/inet.h>

#define HTTP_PORT 80
#define WWW_EXAMPLE_COM 0x5DB8D822 // 93.184.216.34

int main() {
    int sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);
    if (sock < 0) {
        perror("socket failed");
        return 1;
    }

    struct sockaddr_in server_addr;
    server_addr.sin_family = AF_INET;
    server_addr.sin_port = htons(HTTP_PORT);
    server_addr.sin_addr.s_addr = htonl(WWW_EXAMPLE_COM);

    int conn = connect(sock, (const struct sockaddr *) &server_addr, sizeof(server_addr));
    if (conn < 0) {
        perror("connect failed");
        return 1;
    }

    char buf[1024];
    snprintf(buf, 1024, "GET / HTTP/1.1\r\nHost: www.example.com\r\n\r\n");
    int sent = send(sock, buf, strlen(buf), 0);
    if (sent < 0) {
        perror("send failed");
        return 1;
    }

    int received = recv(sock, buf, 1024, 0);
    if (received < 0) {
        perror("recv failed");
        return 1;
    }

    printf("%s\n", buf);

    close(sock);
}
```